*Copyright 2019 Starkware Industries Ltd. Licensed under the Apache
License, Version 2.0 (the "License"). You may not use this file except
in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at
<https://www.starkware.co/open-source-license/> Unless required by
applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the
License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR
CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for
the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the
License.*

# Part 2: Constraints

-   [Video Lecture
    (youtube)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fg3mFPXEYQY)

-   [Slides
    (PDF)](https://starkware.co/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/STARK101-Part2.pdf)

In this part, we are going to create a set of constraints over the trace
`a`. The constraints will be expressions in the trace’s cells that are
polynomials (rather than [rational
functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rational_function)) if and only
if the trace represents a valid computation of the FibonacciSq. We will
get there in three steps:

1.  Start by specifying the constraints we care about (the **FibonacciSq
    constraints**).

2.  Translate the FibonacciSq constraints into **polynomial
    constraints**.

3.  Translate those into **rational functions** that represent
    polynomials if and only if the original constraints hold.

# Step 1 - FibonacciSq Constraints

For `a` to be a correct trace of a FibonacciSq sequence that proves our
claim:

1.  The first element has to be 1, namely = 1\].

2.  The last element has to be 2338775057, namely = 2338775057\].

3.  The FibonacciSq rule must apply, that is - for every ,
    \[i+2\]=a\[i+1\]²+a\[i\]².

# Step 2 - Polynomial Constraints

Recall that `f` is a polynomial over the trace domain, that evaluates
exactly to `a` over where is the "small" group generated by .

We now rewrite the above three constraints in a form of polynomial
constraints over `f`:

1.  = 1$\] is translated to the polynomial , which evalutes to 0 for
    (note that is ).

2.  = 2338775057$\] is translated to the polynomial , which evalutes to
    0 for .

3.  =a<sup><span class="i+1">2+a\[i\]</span></sup>2$\] for every is
    translated to the polynomial , which evaluates to 0 for .

# Hands on

First, since this is a separate notebook from Part 1, let’s run the
following piece of code to have all the variables here with their
correct values. Note that it may take up to 30 seconds, since it reruns
the polynomial interpolation.

    from channel import Channel
    from field import FieldElement
    from merkle import MerkleTree
    from polynomial import interpolate_poly, X, prod
    from tutorial_sessions import part1

    a, g, G, h, H, eval_domain, f, f_eval, f_merkle, channel = part1()
    print('Success!')

You will obtain each of the three constraints as a quotient of two
polynomials, making sure the remainder is the zero polynomial.

# Step 3 - Rational Functions (That are in Fact Polynomials)

Each of the constraints above is represented by a polynomial that
supposedly evaluates to on certain elements of the group . That is, for
some , we claim that

(note that for the first two constraints, because they only refer to one
point and for the third ).

This is equivalent to saying that is divisible, as a polynomial, by all
of , or, equivalently, by

Therefore, each of the three constraints above can be written as a
rational function of the form:

for the corresponding and . In this step we will construct these three
rational functions and show that they are indeed polynomials.

# The First Constraint:

In the first constraint, and .

We will now construct the **polynomial** , making sure that is indeed
divisible by .

Solution:

    numer0 = f - 1
    denom0 = X - 1

Convince yourself that vanishes at by making sure that evaluating this
polynomial at yields .

The fact that has a root at implies that it is divisible by . Run the
following cell to convince yourself that the remainder of `numer0`
modulo `denom0` is , and therefore division indeed yields a polynomial:

    numer0 % denom0

Run the following cell to construct `p0`, the polynomial representing
the first constraint, by dividing `numer0` by `denom0`:

    p0 = numer0 / denom0

Run test:

    assert p0(2718) == 2509888982
    print('Success!')

# The Second Constraint

Construct the polynomial `p1` representing the second constraint, ,
similarly.

Solution:

    numer1 = f - 2338775057
    denom1 = X - g**1022
    p1 = numer1 / denom1

Run test:

    assert p1(5772) == 232961446
    print('Success!')

# The Third Constraint - Succinctness

The last constraint’s rational function is slightly more complicated:

whose denominator can be rewritten, so that the entire expression is
easier to compute:

This follows from the equality

Convince yourself of this equality using the function `prod` that takes
a list and computes its product.

Solution:

    lst = [(X - g**i) for i in range(1024)]
    prod(lst)

For more information, see our blog post titled [Arithmetization
II](https://medium.com/starkware/arithmetization-ii-403c3b3f4355).

Let’s pause for a moment, and look at a simple example on how
polynomials are composed. After that we will generate the third
constraint.

# Composing Polynomials (a detour)

Create the two polynomials , :

    q = 2*X ** 2 + 1
    r = X - 3

Composing on yields a new polynomial: Run the following cell to create a
third polynomial `cmp` by composing `q` on `r` and convince yourself
that `cmp` is indeed the composition of `q` and `r`:

    cmp = q(r)
    cmp

# Back to Polynomial Constraints

Construct the third constraint `p2` in a similar manner to the
construction of `p0` and `p1`, using polynomial composition. Along the
way, verify that is a root of the **numerator** while is not.

Solution:

    numer2 = f(g**2 * X) - f(g * X)**2 - f**2
    print("Numerator at g^1020 is", numer2(g**1020))
    print("Numerator at g^1021 is", numer2(g**1021))
    denom2 = (X**1024 - 1) / ((X - g**1021) * (X - g**1022) * (X - g**1023))

    p2 = numer2 / denom2

Run test:

    assert p2.degree() == 1023, f'The degree of the third constraint is {p2.degree()} when it should be 1023.'
    assert p2(31415) == 2090051528
    print('Success!')

Run the following cell to observe the degrees of the constraint
polynomials `p0`, `p1` and `p2`, all less than . This will be important
in the next part.

    print('deg p0 =', p0.degree())
    print('deg p1 =', p1.degree())
    print('deg p2 =', p2.degree())

# Step 4 - Composition Polynomial

Recall that we’re translating a problem of checking the validity of
three polynomial constraints to checking that each of the rational
functions are polynomials.

Our protocol uses an algorithm called
[FRI](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2017/134/) to do so, which will
be discussed in the next part. In order for the proof to be succinct
(short), we prefer to work with just one rational function instead of
three. For that, we take a random linear combination of called the
**composition polynomial** (CP for short):

where are random field elements obtained from the verifier, or in our
case - from the channel.

Proving that (the rational function) is a polynomial guarantees, with
high probability, that each of , , are themselves polynomials.

In the next part, you will generate a proof for an equivalent fact. But
first, let’s create `CP` using `Channel.receive_random_field_element` to
obtain .

Solution:

    def get_CP(channel):
        alpha0 = channel.receive_random_field_element()
        alpha1 = channel.receive_random_field_element()
        alpha2 = channel.receive_random_field_element()
        return alpha0*p0 + alpha1*p1 + alpha2*p2

Run test:

    test_channel = Channel()
    CP_test = get_CP(test_channel)
    assert CP_test.degree() == 1023, f'The degree of cp is {CP_test.degree()} when it should be 1023.'
    assert CP_test(2439804) == 838767343, f'cp(2439804) = {CP_test(2439804)}, when it should be 838767343'
    print('Success!')

# Commit on the Composition Polynomial

Lastly, we evaluate over the evaluation domain (`eval_domain`), build a
Merkle tree on top of that and send its root over the channel. This is
similar to committing on the LDE trace, as we did at the end of part 1.

Solution:

    def CP_eval(channel):
        CP = get_CP(channel)
        return [CP(d) for d in eval_domain]

Construct a Merkle Tree over the evaluation and send its root over the
channel.

Solution:

    channel = Channel()
    CP_merkle = MerkleTree(CP_eval(channel))
    channel.send(CP_merkle.root)

Test your code:

    assert CP_merkle.root == 'a8c87ef9764af3fa005a1a2cf3ec8db50e754ccb655be7597ead15ed4a9110f1', 'Merkle tree root is wrong.'
    print('Success!')
